Hello, freak bitches. Boom. And we're live speaking of vacations.
Tell me about Guyana.
Yeah, that was a good segue. You've been there a bunch, you know?
No. While I was in, no, I I've been to Guyana twice between there.
I went to Bolivia and did like very similar, very similar kind of trip,
like doing a river trip with Amerindians. Are those.
People weirded out by Americans because of the Jonestown massacre thing?
It's so funny.
You bring up Jonestown because there's a couple things I've been surprised.
Like, uh, the, the, so the,
the, the main group I was with in Guyana, um,
is the [inaudible]. And I was surprised one day when I was, they
, they make a dish, they make a dish with a
cassava, which is a root, like manioc, um,
they make a dish with that. They make a flower
from it and make a dish. And I was one day saying, Hey, that's a little, it
looks like pizza. Right? No. Right
, right. No comprehension, but like, no thought of what pizza is. I remember thinking like, wow, man, like you take like such a, you know, you just consider such a part of everyday life
it's pizza. Know what it was. Yeah
. And they don't know about Georgetown. Whoa. Even those
in their own country, they don't know about it at all. No, it's just not, but
you like, we'll get into this, but you got to
like realize sort of how insular, you know, and
the Amerindian communities are, who live in the, in the jungle in Guyana.
Did they have communication on any.
More and more now? And there was a lot, a lot change.
The two times I went there with her five or six years apart,
they discovered sunglasses.
And I remember the first time I was down there trying to turn them on. Cause,
uh, you know, they, they, they bow hunt for fish. Right.
Which is one of the main ways they get fish is bow hunt for fish.
And when you're looking into the water, polarized lenses are invaluable.
I feel lost without fish, under water. And I kept saying, man,
you got to get on board with polarized sunglasses, not handed to him.
He didn't like it. This guy Rove.
And he didn't like anything about having them on his face. He just like,
couldn't do it. But then I go down to five years later and um,
every one of those boys is rocket polarized glasses. So you see changes.
But yeah,
that's the thing like I've brought up Jonestown a number of times because in the
us, if you say, Hey, I'm going to Guyana,
all anybody says is don't drink the Kool-Aid. Right? Yeah.
It wasn't really Kool-Aid.
It was some like Kool-Aid no, it was a Kool-Aid type drink.
No. So when people look at, when we had this conversation,
cause there's a couple of things that are important here, what the poison was.
Right. So we had a conversation,
I looked back up the route. I mentioned that they make a root. Yeah.
So there's a root cassava. And it's like, yeah.
So it's the route that gives all life. They eat, they call it. No,
but I mean they eat fish and game. Okay.
River fish and wild game. And then that's like a staple that they eat every day.
And the only thing they,
every day is a half dozen things all produced
from cassava,
which is kind of like a yam and it's cultivated with slash and burn agriculture.
And they cultivate these yams. And from it, they make a flower.
Um, they make a, a type of grain. It's like cous, cous.
They make a syrup that's used as a coloring
agent and a flavoring agent. They make a non-alcoholic drink.
They make a somewhat alcoholic drink. That would be like an equivalent to beer.
And then they make a much more alcoholic drink,
which would be an equivalent like fortified wine. Wow.
They make all this stuff from this, this route to take grow, um,
in its raw form when you shred the root and squeeze the
shredding. So it'd be like,
imagine you took a yam and shredded a yam and then squeeze the add between your
hands and tripped out of liquid. That liquid is deadly poisonous. Okay. Dogs,
chickens, people, anything that drinks that liquid die. Yes.
Jesus and it's cyanide. So wow. The Jonestown massacre,
uh, it was a cocktail.
Of.
The best people think that it was Kool-Aid flavor, aid
value and potassium cyanide.
My question coming home from Ghana was like,
did they was the cyanide from the root?
Were they like doing homemade cyanide? But, and so when I got home,
I looked into this and it's,
and it seems as though that that commune Jonestown commune
had been ordering actual potassium cyanide,
which is used in a number of mining practices and other stuff.
So it's an available,
it's an available compound and that's what they laced the Kool-Aid with.
I had heard about this cassava stuff.
And what do they know what the process is like?
Did they know like how people figured out how to make it non-poisonous oh, wow.
It's just been done so long.
Yeah.
Stuff with like different poisons they use to poison that people use to poison
fish. Um,
what strikes me about it is how in the village, like the, the, the,
the Macungie village I was in, um, is mostly Macungie,
but there's also like wop Ashana, which is another tribe.
Carob is not our tribe,
but it's predominantly a Macungie village and there's about 300 people with a
live in this village. Um, and how careless they are with the liquid.
Like if you nowadays like, picture, like,
you're like the type of person,
like you and me are married to and raise kids with. Right.
If you had that type of mom and you had a big bowl of a liquid that
would kill you, if you drank a bit
how that bowl would be monitored in your household. TCIs right.
That'd be like barbed wire around it, electrical.
Fence, just lazy. They just lay it out. And I said,
I was asked, this guy wrote him, but here, man, uh.
I kept returning to this. There's certain things I kept.
I would always ask him just like things that he's struggled to understand my
fixation on it. But I kept saying to this MACUSA guy,
Roven who I should back up to. I got communication. So guy out is the,
it's the only English speaking country in south America. No, no.
The government functions are English. So if you,
if you picture yourself in America,
it's Northeast corner opening out onto the Southern Caribbean
that's guy on it's bordered on the east,
by Suriname on the west, by Venezuela to the south,
by Brazil, it's 90% Virgin rainforest.
And within that, 90% of verge rainforest is only 10% of the population.
So the coastal peoples are like Creole cultures.
People mostly descended from slave trade Europeans in the interior
are the Amerindian groups. And, um,
the government function sort of the power in,
in Guyana is that as the coastal peoples, and there's not a ton of inner inner,
it used to be barely any interplay between the Amerindian communities in the
government, the government's English speaking.
So in you'll find that there's a lot of English mixed in,
in the Amerindian communities, in some people like this guy,
Roven because he's sort of a upping, he's like a,
he has a leadership role in his community and he's learned just standard
English very well. Um, he's had a fascinating life,
just how much stuff has changed for him. Uh, so I, you can just like converse.
Okay. And in a way that you can converse in like an,
a type of the type of English we're talking right now, almost,
which creates this weird tension between the things that you're discussing and
how you're discussing them. Like for instance,
to have a guy just in conversational English, talking about problems,
they're having with neighboring shamans and their own Sharman,
putting curses on each other. And it like creates like,
there's like a strange tension between like how it's being conveyed to you.
You know? Like how so, like, okay,
if you're talking conversational and I guess like a life it's almost like,
you'd want it to be when he's telling you this,
you'd almost want to be reading it in like close caption.
And he'd be saying it in the indigenous language,
because it sounds weird to have to have an idea that's so foreign to
us,
which would be like a battle of shamans battling over access to wild animals.
Okay. Um,
to that delivered in conversational English just struck me as unusual.
Cause like, usually when you're traveling,
you're getting all of your information, like traveling and Bolivia,
a guy would tell a story and he'd tell a story in, um,
SIM Shan. No one was saying that same Shan Chimani okay.
He tells story in Chimani to a person who spoke Spanish,
the person who speaks Spanish would tell it to a person.
No, no, no. That Yamane guy telling someone who speaks German and Spanish,
then that person telling it to a person who speaks Spanish and
English.
And then that person giving you the information when you get it
through that, it takes on a mystical quality. Like you're crossing some space,
time thing, right.
Where you're seeing like these ideas discussed in their ancestral tongue.
Okay. Yeah. Remember I sent you a video of a guy talking about killing a Jaguar.
Yes. Right. The language you've never like when he's speaking, you're like,
I've never in all my travels.
I've never heard a language that sounds anything like that is a.
Video online. Can we play that it's online? Do you know the title of it?
It's uh.
I think if you type in like, um,
[inaudible] T S I Chimani Jaguar
CTA.
See if Jamie can pull it up. It's very cool. The language is really amazing.
Seems so ancient. Yeah. Yes.
It's not like, has nothing to do with like the Latin languages just.
Sounds so it's, it's very unique.
So I guess what I'm getting at is to hear someone talking about something in
conversational English,
that seems so far removed from just our understanding of things.
It takes on a weird quality,
but what's nice about it is you can go to a place where life is so vastly
different than anything we understand and just get like the straight dope right
from the source is why I love. It's kinda like, what's so cool about Guyana,
because you can go and converse with, with people who are,
are very much a hunter gatherer culture today,
but just shoot the with them without ever feeling like you're missing something.
Wow.
This is like the everything's not lost in translation and all weird and garbled
and, and like painstaking to Wade through.
But you can just ask like, Hey, what's up with the local Sharman? Oh,
I'll give you the dope on the Laurel. And so they trade spells.
Yeah. Well, yeah, we'll talk about that. But I,
I feel like I was laying the groundwork for, uh, the Jim Jones poison.
Did you find the video? I,
I lost the word that you were spelling that T S I M
a N E.
T S I M a N E. What does that mean? Shamani, that's how it is. You spell.
It. I could be, I could be screwing up.
You know how you spell a lot worse when you're not actually writing it out.
Yeah.
I don't know how anybody wins a spelling bee ever
Tumani is TSI. Yeah. So if.
You type in Chimani Jaguar,
T S I M a N E Jaguar.
Wow. The whole.
Thing is an Amerindian hunter remembers his best dog lost to a Jaguar in the
jungles of Bolivia. Right. Here we go. Let's play this because.
It's awesome. Here we go.
The
following is an interview with a member of the Tumani tribe of Bolivia,
do their inherent difficulties of translating indigenous languages.
Subtitles are at times approximate and the
see mom, that theme
[inaudible]
. So he's explaining where he's from. He's saying he hunts for food. I always share.
That means I get with the family. I'm a good provider of meat
cutting up the meat and this video. Yes. I also enjoy
the adventure. I love trekking through the jungle. Once I was hunting with my favorite dog and a couple
of the dogs, they ran ahead barky and they were going after something.
All of a sudden, my favorite dog just went completely silent.
They were about 50 meters ahead of me. When I got there,
the other dogs had gone ahead after something
[inaudible] saying, my favorite dog was laying there dead.
There was a big hole in his right side. Almost looked like it had been arrowed.
If we didn't hit.
The first thing I do is pick up my dog and set him where the ants wouldn't get
in his body. That dog was the bravest one I had.
I'm not going to translate into more, I guess,
just watching the video if you're interested,
but you get a sense of how cool it is. So did we cover the,
did we fully cover the poison.
Thing? No, not really. So I got home. Yeah. So it wasn't the same poison, but.
Jim Jones, uh, he grew up in like, uh, he was involved.
In a Pentecostal church. He's involved in the Methodist church.
Then he kind of became a healer and started his
own cult. And it was funny.
I was reading about him when I was trying to figure out the poison.
I was reading about how he was kind of ahead of his time because the Jim Jones
massacre was 1979 in a 78 or 79.
And one thing that got him sideways with his church was that he wanted to have
an interracial service. Wow.
And that caused friction in his church at the time earlier in his career.
And he moved out to the bay area and started this church.
And then he got like kind of paranoid and thought that his congregants shouldn't
be engaging in sexual activities, but he had, he was syring,
illegitimate children left, and right. They go down to Guyana,
go out to the jungle. You know, a thousand of them down there,
people in the U S from the bay area, kind of like,
wonder what happened to their loved ones.
They send a Congressman down there to try to figure out what's going on.
He shows up with a bunch of cameras. The Congressman says, you know, he's like,
I'm going to help anyone who wants to go back to the bay area,
go back to the bay area. He goes to the airstrip there's was a shootout.
The Congress, the U S Congressman gets killed in the shootout.
And then they just all start killing themselves with the poison
and firearms and other,
270 some kids over 900 people. Yeah.
I remember it's like the defining thing, but then yeah,
when you talk to these boys, I'm like, you know, Georgetown,
like the Jonestown or the, you know, the Jim Jones, Jonestown massacre.
Never drank the Kool-Aid like, no.
See, I hadn't heard it was, it was budget Kool-Aid or no, that's the dumbest.
It was. And I.
And that's a debate.
And it trying to find like trying to like dig around and find the source of the
Sinai, which became very important to me to learn for some reason. Um,
no, and I think Kool-Aid even tried to distance himself from it probably it was
Kool-Aid, but there there's like some archival stuff.
And I guess in this archival stuff,
images like footage taken around and photographs around people have found out
that they had both aide and Kool-Aid on hand.
That's hilarious what it was. Kool-Aid propaganda.
It was trying to pass the buck on the flavor aid.
So yeah, no, no thing there. And if you,
so if you go up the main river that drains, uh,
the main river, that drains guy on is the Weebo.
And if you go way up the SQE Weebo and, um, you'll,
you'll get to in a stream that comes in from there called the roup, a Noonan,
you go up the roof Nooney,
and then you get to the Rewa and at the mouth of the Rewa and Rupa,
Nuni is Rewa village. And in Rewa village, you're,
uh,
isolated enough where you don't know about 900 Americans.
And in some other people from other areas night, you know,
dying in a mass suicide.
Wow. That's that's around the time you were born. That's fascinating that it's,
it makes sense though, that they're just so removed from it. Yeah. Do they, um,
do they use agriculture? Like how are they getting this concept?
They grow peppers and then they grow the cassava and the cassava, like it's,
it's kind of amazing. Um, you know,
we always hear about slash and burn agriculture, so they'll,
they'll go in and do a slash and burn in a spot, out in the jungle. Um,
but it's like,
it's like a recycled sort of slash and burn agriculture and I'll break down what
that means.
So they'll go into an area and slash everything and burn it just to clear the,
just so sunlight can make it through to the ground.
So they chop the jungle down and burn everything. Then the cassava,
like I said, it looks like big yams. When you grow it,
you just take a stock of an existing plant
and just bury that stock in the ground. And it'll sprout up a new crop.
And so, you know, you're close to the equator, so you don't have
as much, there's some seasonal variation.
They do have times that they do have like, they wet season and dry season,
but it's like, you always get about the same amount of darkness as daylight.
And they don't have the wild fluctuations that we have in the temperate zone,
so they can grow year round and they stage it. So, you know,
you have a crop that's coming in,
you have a crop that will be coming in in three months,
you have a crop that will be coming in in six months,
you have a crop that becoming a nine months.
And once you get a certain number of cycles,
I can't remember how many cycles you get off piece of ground.
You let the ground go Farrell,
give it a few years and then come in and burn it again.
Also intermittently every time you plant cassava you, before you replant,
you make a little fire and burn some debris in that same spot, no irrigation.
You're not watering it at all. Um,
and that's the only fertilize you're giving it is.
You're burning some of the surrounding just to try to scraped up from the jungle
floor that you burn there and grow it.
And it is a staple of life that in river fish
and game, it's.
Just such a wild thing that it's such a poisonous plant. I don't.
Get it. I don't get it.
[inaudible].